Enhance documentation on layouting GLSP diagrams (#56)
eclipsesource/graphical-lsp-website: content/documentation/ui-extensions/content.md

+++
fragment = "content"
weight = 100

title = "UI Extensions"

[sidebar]
  sticky = true
+++

> An UI Extension is a concept provided by the underlying framework Sprotty, which allows to display additional UI HTML elements on topf of a diagram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A UI Extension is a concept provided by the underlying framework Sprotty, which allows to display additional UI HTML elements on top of a diagram.
```

> It is often used to add UI controls to the diagram, good base examples are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is often used to add UI controls to the diagram. It is also frequently used in the core GLSP functionality:
```

- the GLSP [tool palette](https://github.com/eclipse-glsp/glsp-client/blob/master/packages/protocol/src/action-protocol/tool-palette.ts)
- the Sprotty [command palette](https://github.com/eclipse/sprotty/blob/master/packages/sprotty/src/features/command-palette/command-palette.ts)
- the Sprotty [EditLabelUI](https://github.com/eclipse/sprotty/blob/master/packages/sprotty/src/features/edit/edit-label-ui.ts)

#### Register and activate custom UI Extensions

To implement a custom UI extension, it is necessary to extend the base [`AbstractUIExtension`](https://github.com/eclipse/sprotty/blob/master/packages/sprotty/src/base/ui-extensions/ui-extension.ts).
This super class provides a base HTML element (`containerElement`) which is then the base for the custom UI elements.
It also provides utility methods for showing/hiding or handling focus of the extension.

> To add custom UI elements, the abstract methods `initializeContents` shall be implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the actual UI elements to the DOM, the abstract method `initializeContents` must be implemented.
```

[uiex-registry]: https://github.com/eclipse/sprotty/blob/master/packages/sprotty/src/base/ui-extensions/ui-extension-registry.ts

The [UIExtensionRegistry][uiex-registry] allows to register multiple UIExtensions per diagram.

> To enable an UI Extension the corresponding Action or Command shall be used, namely [`SetUIExtensionVisibilityAction`][uiex-registry] or [`SetUIExtensionVisibilityCommand`][uiex-registry].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable a UI Extension a [`SetUIExtensionVisibilityAction`][uiex-registry] or [`SetUIExtensionVisibilityCommand`][uiex-registry] with the respective UI Extension ID needs to be invoked.
```

As already mentioned, there is a broad use case for UI extensions, hence also their trigger events can of course vary.

> UI extensions can be enabled via context menu entries, mouse click events, keyboard events or changes of the diagram itself, for example the change of the diagram's `EditMode`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UI extensions can be enabled practically with any event that can dispatch an action, e.g. via context menu entries, mouse click events, keyboard events or changes of the diagram itself, for example the change of the diagram's `EditMode`.
```

      insertedDiv.insertAdjacentText("beforeend", label);
      return button;
    }
    return document.createElement("div");
  }

  protected createIcon(codiconId: string): HTMLElement {
    const icon = document.createElement("i");
    icon.classList.add(...codiconCSSClasses(codiconId), "overlay-icon");
    return icon;
  }
}
```

To improve the styling of the extension, we make use of the defined CSS classes and position the overlay on the top left of the diagram and reduce the opacity of the buttons by default.
On hover, the buttons are fully visible.

```css
.button-overlay {
  position: absolute;
  left: 25px;
  top: 25px;
  text-align: left;
  min-width: 150px;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  z-index: 1000;
  font-family: sans-serif;
}

.overlay-button {
  opacity: 0.5;
  display: flex;
}

.overlay-button:hover {
  opacity: 1;
  cursor: pointer;
}

.overlay-icon {
  margin-right: 10px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  width: 16px;
  height: 16px;
  text-align: center;
}
```

To register the extension, it has to be bound as singleton and

```ts
bind(ButtonOverlay).toSelf().inSingletonScope();
bind(TYPES.IUIExtension).toService(ButtonOverlay);
```

> Activate ui extension, for example directly after all necessary initially Actions where dispatched in [GLSPDiagramWidget#`dispatchInitialActions()`](https://github.com/eclipse-glsp/glsp-theia-integration/blob/master/packages/theia-integration/src/browser/diagram/glsp-diagram-widget.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate our UI extension, for example, alongside the initial actions, we can dispatch the `SetUIExtensionVisibilityAction` in [GLSPDiagramWidget#`dispatchInitialActions()`](https://github.com/eclipse-glsp/glsp-theia-integration/blob/master/packages/theia-integration/src/browser/diagram/glsp-diagram-widget.ts) after a certain delay.
```
